README.md, before:

# Tools-and-Tips

Repo of useful documentation and tools I find useful.

## Pages

- [Software configuration](software.md) 
- [Powershell profile](powershell_profile.md) 
- [tmux config](.tmux.conf.md) 
- [Technical Writing](technical_writing.md) 

## Shell setup without sudo privs

```bash
#!/usr/bin/env zsh

#install gef
bash -c "$(curl -fsSL https://gef.blah.cat/sh)"
pip3 install --user keystone-engine ropper capstone unicorn requests

mkdir -p $HOME/bin
mkdir -p $HOME/clones

#install useful additions
#useful little CLI hex viewer
cargo install hexyl

#better pager, called bat
curl -s -L https://github.com/sharkdp/bat/releases/download/v0.23.0/bat-v0.23.0-x86_64-unknown-linux-musl.tar.gz | tar -x -z -C $HOME -f -
mv bat-v0.23.0-x86_64-unknown-linux-musl/bat $HOME/bin/batcat
ln $HOME/bin/batcat $HOME/bin/bat
rm -rf bat-v0.23.0-x86_64-unknown-linux-musl

if [ ! -e $HOME/antigen.zsh ]; then
    curl -L git.io/antigen > $HOME/antigen.zsh
fi

if [ ! -d $HOME/clones/sunwait ]; then
    git clone https://github.com/risacher/sunwait.git $HOME/clones/sunwait
    cd $HOME/clones/sunwait
    make
    cp $HOME/clones/sunwait/sunwait $HOME/bin/sunwait
    cd $HOME
fi

if [ ! -d $HOME/clones/bat-extras ]; then
    git clone https://github.com/eth-p/bat-extras.git $HOME/clones/bat-extras
    cd $HOME/clones/bat-extras
    cp $HOME/clones/bat-extras/bin/* $HOME/bin/
    cd $HOME
fi

if [ ! -d $HOME/clones/tmux-powerline ]; then
    git clone https://github.com/erikw/tmux-powerline.git $HOME/clones/tmux-powerline
fi

if [ ! -d $HOME/clones/diff-so-fancy ]; then
    git clone https://github.com/so-fancy/diff-so-fancy.git $HOME/clones/diff-so-fancy
fi

if [ ! -d $HOME/.tmux/plugins/tpm ]; then
    mkdir -p $HOME/.tmux/plugins/tpm
    git clone https://github.com/tmux-plugins/tpm $HOME/.tmux/plugins/tpm
fi

if [ ! -d $HOME/.oh-my-zsh ]; then
    git clone https://github.com/ohmyzsh/ohmyzsh.git $HOME/.oh-my-zsh
fi

ln -s $HOME/clones/diff-so-fancy $HOME/bin/diff-so-fancy

sed -i 's/alias diff/#alias diff/g' $HOME/.oh_my_zsh/lib/theme-and-appearance.zsh
cd $HOME/.oh-my-zsh/
git add lib/theme-and-appearance.zsh
git commit -m 'unalias diff'
cd $HOME

git config --global user.name "" #fill me in!
git config --global user.email "" #fill me in!
git config --global core.pager "diff-so-fancy | less --tabs=4 -RFX"
git config --global interactive.diffFilter "diff-so-fancy --patch"
git config --global color.ui true
git config --global color.diff-highlight.oldNormal    "red bold"
git config --global color.diff-highlight.oldHighlight "red bold 52"
git config --global color.diff-highlight.newNormal    "green bold"
git config --global color.diff-highlight.newHighlight "green bold 22"
git config --global color.diff.meta       "11"
git config --global color.diff.frag       "magenta bold"
git config --global color.diff.func       "146 bold"
git config --global color.diff.commit     "yellow bold"
git config --global color.diff.old        "red bold"
git config --global color.diff.new        "green bold"
git config --global color.diff.whitespace "red reverse"

chsh -s /bin/zsh

#only if $HOME is on NFS
env GEM_HOME=/disk/scratch/$(whoami) 
gem install colorls

#for all classes except 496:
wget -q -O setup.tar.bz2 http://web.cecs.pdx.edu/~dmcgrath/setup.tar.bz2
#for cs496:
#wget -q -O setup.tar.bz2 http://web.cecs.pdx.edu/~dmcgrath/setup_496.tar.bz2
tar xavf setup.tar.bz2 -C ~/
```

## Useful links for learning:

- [tmux cheatsheet](https://tmuxcheatsheet.com/)
- [Linux Handbook on tmux](https://linuxhandbook.com/tmux/)
- [Markdown](https://guides.github.com/features/mastering-markdown/)
- [The C Book](https://publications.gbdirect.co.uk/c_book/)
- [The GNU `make` manual](https://www.gnu.org/software/make/manual/make.pdf)
- [Managing projects with `make`](https://github.com/Vauteck/docs_utils/blob/master/autotools/Oreilly%20-%20Managing%20Projects%20With%20Gnu%20Make%203Rd%20Edition.pdf)
- [The `chmod` calculator](https://chmod-calculator.com/)
- [The Python tutor](https://pythontutor.com/)
- [_The Linux Command Line_](http://linuxcommand.org/tlcl.php) (Direct [PDF link](https://sourceforge.net/projects/linuxcommand/files/TLCL/19.01/TLCL-19.01.pdf/download))
- [_Adventures with the Linux Command Line_](https://sourceforge.net/projects/linuxcommand/files/AWTLCL/21.10/AWTLCL-21.10.pdf/download)
- [_The Linux Development Platform_](https://archive.org/details/ost-computer-science-0130091154/mode/1up)
- [gdb tutorial](http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~gilpin/tutorial/)
- [gef manual](https://hugsy.github.io/gef/)

Commit message:

adding link to vm setup on macos to readme
adding TOC to vm setup on macos

README.md, after:

# Tools-and-Tips

Repo of useful documentation and tools I find useful.

* auto-gen TOC:
{:toc}
## Pages

- [Software configuration](software.md) 
- [Powershell profile](powershell_profile.md) 
- [tmux config](.tmux.conf.md) 
- [Technical Writing](technical_writing.md) 
- [VM Setup on macOS](vms_on_macos.md) 

## Useful links for learning:

- [tmux cheatsheet](https://tmuxcheatsheet.com/)
- [Linux Handbook on tmux](https://linuxhandbook.com/tmux/)
- [Markdown](https://guides.github.com/features/mastering-markdown/)
- [The C Book](https://publications.gbdirect.co.uk/c_book/)
- [The GNU `make` manual](https://www.gnu.org/software/make/manual/make.pdf)
- [Managing projects with `make`](https://github.com/Vauteck/docs_utils/blob/master/autotools/Oreilly%20-%20Managing%20Projects%20With%20Gnu%20Make%203Rd%20Edition.pdf)
- [The `chmod` calculator](https://chmod-calculator.com/)
- [The Python tutor](https://pythontutor.com/)
- [_The Linux Command Line_](http://linuxcommand.org/tlcl.php) (Direct [PDF link](https://sourceforge.net/projects/linuxcommand/files/TLCL/19.01/TLCL-19.01.pdf/download))
- [_Adventures with the Linux Command Line_](https://sourceforge.net/projects/linuxcommand/files/AWTLCL/21.10/AWTLCL-21.10.pdf/download)
- [_The Linux Development Platform_](https://archive.org/details/ost-computer-science-0130091154/mode/1up)
- [gdb tutorial](http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~gilpin/tutorial/)
- [gef manual](https://hugsy.github.io/gef/)

## Shell setup without sudo privs

```bash
#!/usr/bin/env zsh

#install gef
bash -c "$(curl -fsSL https://gef.blah.cat/sh)"
pip3 install --user keystone-engine ropper capstone unicorn requests

mkdir -p $HOME/bin
mkdir -p $HOME/clones

#install useful additions
#useful little CLI hex viewer
cargo install hexyl

#better pager, called bat
curl -s -L https://github.com/sharkdp/bat/releases/download/v0.23.0/bat-v0.23.0-x86_64-unknown-linux-musl.tar.gz | tar -x -z -C $HOME -f -
mv bat-v0.23.0-x86_64-unknown-linux-musl/bat $HOME/bin/batcat
ln $HOME/bin/batcat $HOME/bin/bat
rm -rf bat-v0.23.0-x86_64-unknown-linux-musl

if [ ! -e $HOME/antigen.zsh ]; then
    curl -L git.io/antigen > $HOME/antigen.zsh
fi

if [ ! -d $HOME/clones/sunwait ]; then
    git clone https://github.com/risacher/sunwait.git $HOME/clones/sunwait
    cd $HOME/clones/sunwait
    make
    cp $HOME/clones/sunwait/sunwait $HOME/bin/sunwait
    cd $HOME
fi

if [ ! -d $HOME/clones/bat-extras ]; then
    git clone https://github.com/eth-p/bat-extras.git $HOME/clones/bat-extras
    cd $HOME/clones/bat-extras
    cp $HOME/clones/bat-extras/bin/* $HOME/bin/
    cd $HOME
fi

if [ ! -d $HOME/clones/tmux-powerline ]; then
    git clone https://github.com/erikw/tmux-powerline.git $HOME/clones/tmux-powerline
fi

if [ ! -d $HOME/clones/diff-so-fancy ]; then
    git clone https://github.com/so-fancy/diff-so-fancy.git $HOME/clones/diff-so-fancy
fi

if [ ! -d $HOME/.tmux/plugins/tpm ]; then
    mkdir -p $HOME/.tmux/plugins/tpm
    git clone https://github.com/tmux-plugins/tpm $HOME/.tmux/plugins/tpm
fi

if [ ! -d $HOME/.oh-my-zsh ]; then
    git clone https://github.com/ohmyzsh/ohmyzsh.git $HOME/.oh-my-zsh
fi

ln -s $HOME/clones/diff-so-fancy $HOME/bin/diff-so-fancy

sed -i 's/alias diff/#alias diff/g' $HOME/.oh_my_zsh/lib/theme-and-appearance.zsh
cd $HOME/.oh-my-zsh/
git add lib/theme-and-appearance.zsh
git commit -m 'unalias diff'
cd $HOME

git config --global user.name "" #fill me in!
git config --global user.email "" #fill me in!
git config --global core.pager "diff-so-fancy | less --tabs=4 -RFX"
git config --global interactive.diffFilter "diff-so-fancy --patch"
git config --global color.ui true
git config --global color.diff-highlight.oldNormal    "red bold"
git config --global color.diff-highlight.oldHighlight "red bold 52"
git config --global color.diff-highlight.newNormal    "green bold"
git config --global color.diff-highlight.newHighlight "green bold 22"
git config --global color.diff.meta       "11"
git config --global color.diff.frag       "magenta bold"
git config --global color.diff.func       "146 bold"
git config --global color.diff.commit     "yellow bold"
git config --global color.diff.old        "red bold"
git config --global color.diff.new        "green bold"
git config --global color.diff.whitespace "red reverse"

chsh -s /bin/zsh

#only if $HOME is on NFS
env GEM_HOME=/disk/scratch/$(whoami) 
gem install colorls

#for all classes except 496:
wget -q -O setup.tar.bz2 http://web.cecs.pdx.edu/~dmcgrath/setup.tar.bz2
#for cs496:
#wget -q -O setup.tar.bz2 http://web.cecs.pdx.edu/~dmcgrath/setup_496.tar.bz2
tar xavf setup.tar.bz2 -C ~/
```
